What do you make of the last few months of fallout from Yale and Harvard and such?
I mean, yeah, we saw that big testimonial from the presidents. Yeah, it was Harvard, MIT, Penn.
I mean, I wasn't surprised by it. I mean, a lot of people, I think, are finally fully
realizing they're coming to their senses. People have been saying this for a while now.
Oh, you know, eventually the pendulum will swing back and people will finally figure out what's
really going on in these institutions and this sort of ideology that's been spilling out of the
universities. And now I think they finally are actually truly realizing it. But yeah, I saw the
it's kind of the birth of what a lot of people call wokeness in 2015 when I arrived on campus at
Yale. And that was my first semester. I saw what was happening there. And yeah, I mean,
I think you can draw a straight line from some of those events in 2015 to what we're seeing now.
And yeah, it's been really ugly, but, you know, kind of kind of amusing, you know, from my perspective,
because I, you know, I was one of the, I'd like to think that I was one of the sort of
early observers and people who could recognize what was occurring. And then later on, you know,
so Jordan Peterson was another and there have been other critics of higher ed and especially
these elite universities. But yeah, it's been really, really amusing and also sort of disheartening
It's this sort of odd blend of fatalism, shard and Freud, nihilism, sort of pleasure,
displeasure, like, ick, pity. It's a real concatenation of things. And obviously,
we've got a couple of mutual friends that have either been directly or tangentially involved,
Vincent, our mutual friend, I managed to get removed from a higher education institution
because of him appearing on this podcast, Carol Hoeven, who is, you know, a really good
mutual friend, has kind of been thrust into the middle of this. She told me that she basically
felt like she'd been used like a football. And for the people who know who Carol is,
she went on Rogan, I think she cried like six times on Joe's show, she cried at least three
times on mine. We went for breakfast, I'm pretty sure she cried like three times at breakfast.
She's just a very sort of emotional person. She is, she's really sort of feeling this.
Yeah, you realize in a sort of proxy fucking battle like this, the people that are useful
political footballs to be kicked around often end up paying a pretty high price and no one ever
thinks about them because you're like, oh, no, but you're, you know, you're a flaming warrior
for free speech or whatever. And you go, well, yeah, but I didn't ask to be.
Yeah, very few people want to be fired. I mean, a lot of people may not be familiar with just
how difficult it is to get an academic job in the first place. I mean, I'm friends with Vincent,
I saw, I mean, he was hustling hard. And he had a very impressive academic record. And no one
wants to be in that position. I think their critics or their detractors say, like, oh,
you know, oh, pour me with your cancel culture. And now look at you going on all these podcasts
and playing up your victimhood and all of this. But that's not what it is. I think it's, for some
people, it's just a consolation that while I lost my dream job, at the very least, I can sort of
communicate. Let me salvage fucking something. Exactly. And yeah, I was observing all of this
from afar. I mean, one thing that I've pointed out before is that for every, like public academic
cancellation you see, there are probably five to 10 others that are not covered in the media.
Most people actually don't enjoy the limelight that much, especially academics who tend to be
kind of weird nerds with their obscure niche interests, they just want to keep their head
down, do their research, be left alone. And then suddenly they are accused of X, Y, or Z,
and they just want to silently, you know, have it blow over. And that's like the sort of modal
case, that's the usual case. And so yeah, it's been, we can see it now that finally people
are recognizing that there's a there's a serious issue. I didn't even want to an academic job.
I mean, by the time I was probably about halfway through my PhD, I saw what was happening.
I remember, yeah, I would have very contentious discussions with other PhD students and postdocs
and kind of early career researchers. And I would tell them like, I don't think that, you know,
if you color outside the lines, if you are an independent thinker, it will be very difficult
for you to get a sort of typical tenure track academic job now, not impossible, but just much
harder than it would have been maybe 10 or 15 years ago. And people say, Oh, no, that's ridiculous.
It's ridiculous. And now, you know, four, four plus years later, I'm seeing like some of those
friends are having difficulty, some of them have been hired and fired by now. I mean, it's been,
you know, I've seen the whole the whole spectrum of outcomes, some of them have successfully obtained
jobs and just, you know, keep their mouth shut. But for me, I just, that wasn't what I thought
academia was going to be like. I thought it was going to be, you know, this little kind of contained
a bubble, you know, the, I guess some people call it the ivory tower, right, where you can live that
life of the mind and communicate interesting ideas and debate and disagree, but still sort of
inch your way towards the truth, or at least inch your way, inch your way towards interesting
ideas. But, you know, that's interestingly happening more on places like podcasts and
sub-stack and alternate sort of parallel institutions. Yeah, it's fascinating to think
as well about, I guess, soft cancellations. I had Ricky Schlott on who co-authored the
Canceling of the American Mind with Greg Lukyanov. And she was talking about all of the different
ways that people kind of get soft cancelled. And it's just not being invited to the end of your
party, you know, it's people sitting in different locations to you. I think she went to maybe NYU
Stern. And she was hiding Jordan Peterson books under her bed, you know, like fucking Anne Frank
in the attic, that philosophical Anne Frank. And she was saying that, you know, there's lots of
sort of ideological shit tests, she called them, which I thought was a really great name.
You know, what do you think about Ben Shapiro? You know, just like fucking throw that hand
grenade into the room and see if anyone pipes up. Or it doesn't pipe up. That was something
that I learned when I was in grad school was does anyone just remain silent and not say,
oh, he's so, he's an evil right wing, whatever, right? If they just kind of keep their head down
and don't say anything, you know, I sort of, oh, I observed that.
Silence is compliance or whatever. Silence is violence or whatever it is.
What about the, you had this interesting idea about the hidden hierarchies
of the Harvard extension school thing. Yeah, well, I saw that with, you know, I was, you know,
observing what was occurring on Twitter slash X with Christopher Rufo, who was one of the
sort of architects of pointing out and removing the Harvard professor after her comments about,
you know, kind of condoning antisemitism on campus and then discovering her plagiarism and all of
this. But, you know, after he, you know, he was perceived to be successful, I mean, she was,
she was ousted, she was pressured to resign and she did all of these professors at elite universities
and all of these, you know, this, you know, university supporting members of the chattering
class were saying, oh, Christopher Rufo got a degree from the Harvard extension school. And,
you know, are people aware that that's not the real Harvard and people, do people understand that
that's not typically what we think of as a real graduate studies degree at a master,
it's not a real master's degree from Harvard. And they just wanted people to be very aware that this,
you know, this sort of outsider, this pleb who got this degree from this
extension school, he's not a real academic, he's not a real serious thinker. Yeah, he's written
books. Yes, he works at a very prominent think tank. And yes, he's like very successful in the real
world, but he has his degree, which is sort of getting things backwards, right? You want the degree
in order to signify that you're capable in the real world. But, you know, they have the, oh,
this guy's capable in the real world, but now they're looking at the degree as if it's somehow,
it's fraudulent and therefore this nullifies all of his accomplishments. That's indicative of his
real value. Exactly. Yeah, they're placing his value on the educational credential rather than
on his effectiveness in his life and in his career. So, you know, I'm watching this and I'm
thinking like, yeah, this is exactly, I mean, I've seen this, you know, since entering college,
since entering higher ed, this strange status anxiety, particularly among people who attend
these kind of institutions. I mean, the people who are pointing this out about Rufo's degree
were professors or graduates of whatever, Harvard or Oberlin or Stanford, whatever.
Look at these kinds of places. People that knew the language, they understood what an
extension school was. Yes, exactly. And it's just amazing to me that Harvard even has
this program in the first place because it relies on that duplicitous game of,
you know, if you're a member of the unwashed masses and you go to the Harvard Extension
School website, it actually says, we are Harvard, you will have the Harvard degree,
you can put it, it even says something like you'll have the, you know, you'll be able to put
Harvard on your resume. This is on the official website. While simultaneously communicating
the coded message to everyone else at Harvard and everyone else in this sort of rarefied segment of
society that, you know, we have to do that, you know, we have to put that on the website,
but it's not really Harvard. You're not on the main stage, you're kind of on the second stage
in the festival. It's like the overflow room. Why would, like, it's just, it shocks me that
they're willing to take the reputational hit to operate a degree mill. I mean, to me, it's just
very, like, tawdry. Like, it's almost like, you know, I have this, maybe this judgmental attitude
about, like, this is, like, very kind of vulgar that you guys would even do this in the first place
that you're playing this game. And yeah, I thought it was very, yeah, very ugly the way that they were,
they were pointing this out about Rufo. And it also ended up backfiring, I think, because
they felt this sort of, this faction of cultural elites and these legacy institutions felt threatened.
They felt like they had received an L. And so they had to lash out and get back at him.
Well, it's the same as, you know, someone does something to you, a really cutting jibe. And
you're like, shit shoes. Like, it's just, you know, it's the only thing that you're like,
fucking just grappling at something. I remember once there was this guy, it's so funny,
there was this dude stood in the front door of a nightclub complaining about the fact that he
couldn't get in. And he just kept on chirping and kept on chirping and kept on chirping. And I
was feeling particularly pissy that day or whatever. So I said something back to him.
And I've got like two or three, six foot four Geordie guerrillas either side of me that are
working. And I'm busy trying to organize clipboard to something else. And he couldn't think of anything
to do. So I had a necklace on of some kind, like on the outside of a t-shirt, and he sort of reached
forward and like, grab, grab that. And like, that was the one thing. And then sort of scuttled
off. And I was like, like my 35 pounds, like fashion net necklace isn't a big deal. But just
that that's the one thing. And it's kind of the same as Christopher Rufo's like,
extension school, like it's not, you're not part of the real chattering classes.
Yeah, yeah, that's, yeah, it was very like short-sighted. And, and ultimately, I think it was
damaging to them. Oh, anyone else that's got that degree, always thinking about going to that place
is like, Oh, well, they said that ultimately, when the rubber meets the road, Chris Rufo's
like just one of the fucking, like peasants, the same as the rest of us. So maybe I shouldn't
think about, Oh, that's interesting. So you're saying that, that anyone who might want to apply
for the Harvard extension school will see that. And so they'll have fewer applicants, you know,
the institution will ultimately be less profitable. I didn't even think about that part.
Definitely less prestigious. I was, I was thinking more on the reputation end of it rather than the
sort of economic end. But yeah, this, this idea that, that people will observe, I mean,
I thought it was an error for two reasons. One was that it was most people don't like snobs,
right? So they see this and they just feel like icky about it, that they're even pointing this
out in the first place, or that they think that they're somehow superior. They don't like that
attitude. And then the second was that it, to me, it kind of exposed the, the hollowness
of the egalitarian dogma, the supposed egalitarian dogma of elite academia that, you know, oh,
we're all for equity and, you know, DEI or whatever it is that we're so accepting and tolerant and
welcoming. But by the way, like, you know, your, your aristocratic title is fraudulent and you're
a fake. And, you know, so, you know, I was texting a friend earlier about this. He's, he's actually
a grad student at Harvard. And I was like, my impression of this was basically like,
the attitude at elite universities is everyone is equal, but some people are less equal than others,
right? It's a sort of a spin on, on the, the animal farm idea. We're all equal, but some people
are more equal. You heard that George Orwell quote. You said how in The Road to Wigan,
Pierre George Orwell is explaining how upper class snobs, while theoretically pining for a
classless society cling like glue to their miserable fragments of social prestige.
I love that. Yeah, I love that line. I mean, the whole, yeah, the book is great. Orwell was so
astute in his analysis of class, but that was just, yeah, I mean, this has been going on for,
you know, a hundred years now. And that was the first thing that came to mind when I was seeing
this, that, you know, these, these supposedly open-minded, tolerant, welcoming people were
suddenly pointing out that he got a degree from, from the institution, right? Like it's your website.
You've got over the, you've got over the bar that everybody asked for, but you kind of landed in
an awkward place on the crash mat. Yeah. You know, and yeah, you're so right. It's this,
and this is why fundamentally, I think that people are so skeptical and critical of anyone who
proselytises about their morality or how ethical or how caring they are publicly. You should go,
what are you covering up for? I don't believe that you actually think that. And sure enough,
when the gloves are off and you see someone in a little bit of pressure or receiving a little
bit of heat, where did they go? Well, all of the inclusivity and egalitarianism and care for the
beauty of academia overall, all of that's out the window. Yeah. Yeah. When the pressure is on,
right? When people feel threatened, when they feel in a sense of sort of emotional intensity,
a lot of negative emotion, suddenly, you know, the mask slips and you can see what they really
like. Toys are out of the pram. They're just as, and, you know, this is the concern that people
had all along. Yeah. It's like, oh, that's what we thought you were like. We thought that you were
highfalutin, not actually caring, adrenicone drinking, long hooded nose, pentagram dancing,
like dickheads. Yeah. And sure enough, your, your mask has slipped. So I mean, this,
you've got your brand new book out, which everyone can go and buy right now,
as you're going by this very second. We haven't ever spoken about this because pretty much since
I've known you at some point, you've been working on your memoir, Troubled. Yeah.
Luxury beliefs. Yeah. That is a kind of example of luxury belief, although it's not patient zero.
How do you explain to my audience that hasn't yet heard you talk about a
topic that you've repopularized? How do you explain luxury beliefs?
Right. Luxury beliefs are ideas and opinions that confer status on the affluent,
while often inflicting costs on the lower classes. And a core component of a luxury belief is that
the believer is often sheltered from the consequences of his or her belief. And, you know, we can get
into specific examples. But yeah, I like this one that we've been sort of touching on this
snobbish attitude about higher ed and how, yeah, so on the one hand, I mean, you're,
when people are pointing out that this school or that school is better than the other,
you are sort of boosting your own status, right? Especially these people who are
already graduates of or teaching at these institutions, they're bolstering their own
status. And then, you know, by speaking in this way about the hierarchies and,
you know, which school is actually above which other school they are sort of
inflicting costs on everyone else who would like to ascend the educational ladder,
who would like to get a degree. But a lot of these people just don't interact much with people who
are upwardly mobile or trying to be upwardly mobile, who are trying to go to university,
trying to get a degree. The vast majority, and I talk about a lot of the statistics in
my book about this in the later chapters, about how more than 80% of Ivy League graduates have
at least one parent who went to university. I mean, that's, they're sort of a mercenaries from
birth. They've never actually interacted with a person or had a 15 minute conversation with
someone who doesn't have a degree or on their way to getting a degree. And it's just not on their
radar. And so in their world, you know, everyone went to university or everyone should go or,
you know, anyone who doesn't go to the same category of university that they went to,
there's something wrong with them. And I noticed this a lot when I arrived on campus. I mean,
and it's very subtle. I mean, at first, I was sort of, you know, to some degree, I think I was
duped because I fell for the, oh, everyone's equal, everyone's fine, everyone. And, you know,
also the other thing about these institutions now is that they don't, they don't look the same,
right? One of the ideas about, or one of the components of the luxury belief idea is that
luxury beliefs have to a large extent replaced luxury goods, which isn't to say that luxury
goods don't still signify status, brand names and all of those things still matter. But my claim is
that luxury goods have become a noisier signal of status. You can't tell right away necessarily
anymore when you just go about your life in public, who's rich and who's poor just by how they look.
And so, you know, I build on these sort of sociological frameworks in my writing and in my
book, work from Thorsten Wablin at the turn of the 20th century, here with the theory of the
leisure class, he wrote about how, you know, the upper class, the aristocrats of his time,
they demonstrated their status through, you know, tuxedos and evening gowns and pocket watches and
monocles and expensive and intricate hobbies and attending lavish events, hiring servants,
those kinds of things. And then by the mid 20th century, there was a sociologist named Pierre
Bourdieu who wrote a book called Distinction, a social critique of the judgment of taste.
And one of his insights in that book was that rich people, affluent people, they'll convert their
economic capital into cultural capital. And so they'll spend money in order to
demonstrate their class or exhibit their membership to this rarefied strata of society.
And so in his day, you know, again, in the mid 20th century, and he was mostly commenting on
French culture, but people can sort of understand what, you know, what he's getting at, where people
would spend money to learn about the subtleties of wine or the intricacies of art or
falconry or something. Yeah, falconry or beagling or golf or these kinds of, you know,
that you have to have money, you can't be the kind of person who works a manual job or who,
you know, soft hands. You see the same thing in almost the reverse in Asian societies at the
moment when I went to Thailand for the first time, all of the receptionists were wearing
lighter makeup on their face. I thought to myself, why, because it's so silly because,
you know, the face finishes on whatever the jawline here and, you know, the blending between
the face and the neck is difficult to do. And I thought, why, and I asked someone, why the
fuck are they, they're making their faces pale at this at all? Well, it's because the
indigent laborers, the people that work out in the fields are heavily tanned. So the higher
class jobs are the ones that are inside, which means that the paler you are, the more status
you is conferred on you by your profession. But then I also realized how stupid of me
and how, you know, myopically Western of me to do that, coming from Newcastle upon Tyne,
the Jersey shore of the UK, where girls turn themselves orange to signify, I have all of
this leisure time, I'm able to go away on holiday to exotic places and lay by the beach and get
sun on me. I like that. Yeah, yeah, that's very interesting. Yeah, yeah. So if you,
if you live in like Northern Europe or somewhere cold where there isn't a lot of sun,
having a tan is the signifier status. So yeah, I think, yeah, that's, that's an important point
here that, you know, it does vary from culture to culture. I mean, I point, you know, I point
this out the research and everything in my writing about how status itself, the specific
examples and manifestations can be ephemeral, they can be, they can vary by time and place and
culture and generation and so on. But the desire for status, the desire to exhibit it to show other
people how prestigious or how dominant or how, you know, how important you are that that remains.
And so my, my claim is that luxury beliefs, I mean, they're mostly confined to that sort of
highly educated people who attend all the universities, people who study there, people who
are graduates of these places, who tend to operate legacy institutions who run media and,
and academia and who generate knowledge, people who work in sort of culturally influential
organizations. And a lot of them hold these luxury beliefs. I think we saw this
in 2020 and 2021 with the Defund the Police movement. I mean, I coined the term luxury
beliefs in 2019 and started to write about it and do the research to sort of support this idea
and point everything out that sort of all of, all of the, the, the sociological concepts
undergirding it. And then the, like six months later, people started talking about defunding
the police. I was like, I don't even have to, I felt like I didn't even have to like, you know,
here's the reasoning behind luxury beliefs is just defund the police. Like it's right there,
you don't even have to. It's the most, whenever somebody brings up your work to me and talks
about luxury beliefs, the patient zero example is defund the police. Yeah, because it's so
intuitive. Of course. Can you explain why that encapsulates luxury beliefs? So structurally or
functionally so well? Yeah, yeah. So, so, yeah, the luxury beliefs idea, if you say defund the
police, you are increasing your own status because I mean, you look like a caring person,
you look open-minded and interesting and, and, and highly educated. And so, and it also signifies
that you're the kind of person who went to certain kinds of schools, you consume certain
kinds of media, you listen to certain kinds of podcasts and so on. And so it makes you look
a certain way to your peers. But once the support for defund the police becomes implemented into
policy, once police stations and police departments have reduced funding, once you
cultivate an attitude, so it's not just the policy, but you're also cultivating the culture
and the attitude around law enforcement that, oh, we don't need police. You sort of give permission
to people to be suspicious of police or to be derogatory towards police. As a result, we saw
that a lot of, a lot of police officers started retiring in large numbers. There's reports in,
in major US cities that they're having difficulty with recruitment because if you're a smart,
capable young person who wants to make a difference in your community, like, why would you want that
job? If you know that people are going to view you with suspicion or with some kind of, you know,
that you're sort of malicious or evil, cops, I mean, they get paid okay, but it's not like
considering the potential danger they face in their job. Part of the reason why people would
want to do it is because cops formerly used to be seen as respectable and admirable and people
conferred a lot of status onto them. Well, think about the difference between when
a policeman currently in the sort of current defund the police era that we're in,
policeman turns up at a scene versus a firefighter or an ambulance A&E person. You know,
the other two emergency services are seen heralded as heroes and the police like,
ACAB, ACAB, all cops are bastards. I got about that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so who wants that job?
And so gradually, and we saw this in the aftermath of the defund the police movement that violent
crime spiked all across the US, especially major cities, homicide rates increased to levels not
seen since the early 1990s. And so when all of this was unfolding, I actually, I tried to find
some survey data to see like who's actually, you know, like, because I don't know anyone in my
personal life who thinks that we should defund the police. I mean, other than, you know, some people
at Cambridge and other elite universities, but ordinary people who are outside of these institutions,
I didn't know anyone who was supporting this movement. So I had a suspicion this was,
you know, actually, a legitimate luxury belief. I looked at survey data for it,
found one in YouGov in 2020, which found that they collect the data from a representative
sample of Americans, and they broke down the data by income category. And it was the highest
income Americans who were the most supportive of defunding the police. And it was the lowest
income Americans who were the least supportive. And then when later, the different, different
findings were reported for major US cities, Minneapolis and Detroit, one in New York City,
they found that white Democrats were far more supportive of defending the police than black
and Hispanic Democrats. And so it was like the people who were supposedly so kind and so sympathetic
towards the marginalized and the dispossessed and the poor and so on, they were supporting
something that actually those groups didn't even want. And I mean, an increased number of them
were being victimized as a result of it. In my book, I point out that if you compare
the lowest income Americans to Americans who earn the median income, there's, what is it,
they're two to three times more likely to be victims of violent crimes, they're seven times
more likely to be victims of assault, they're 20 times more likely to be victims of sexual assault,
like essentially across the board, the lower your income, the more likely you are to be a
target of crime. Could do with the police. Yes, exactly. You could, yeah, it would be nice to
have someone you could call if you're being burglarized or assaulted. And so yeah, it was a
complete sort of backfiring. And I haven't seen, you know, there hasn't really been any sort of
accountability or any kind of acknowledgement of what happened in the aftermath of that movement.
Yeah, it's wild. And then obviously the big elephant in the room here is that
the people who are supporting it are the ones who are the most likely to live in a gated community,
in an area or a neighborhood that has not called the police in a decade since the last time that
someone from the community that they're probably talking about trying to protect accidentally
wandered through their gated community. So it's rules for the but not for me. And let me explain
to you, poor, underclass peasant person, what is best for you from my vantage point out here in
my very comfortable home? Yes, yes, yeah, yeah. So that's, yeah, that's one of the components
of the luxury belief is that the believer sheltered from the consequences of the belief. And so yeah,
the people who were supporting the defund the police movement, largely college educated,
living in safe communities, living in gated communities, there were reports during the
the political unrest in 2020, and all of the BLM demonstrations and so on, all of the riots that
people in like rich people in Chicago were hiring private security to patrol their neighborhoods
because you know, the police were either distracted due to all of the social unrest and crime that was
occurring, or because police were retiring and so on. And so they were hiring private security in
these rich neighborhoods. And then in New York City, there were reports of people just fleeing to
the Hamptons, like, you know, if you have money and you have resources, you can just flee to your
private little gated area and from home start tweeting about defund the police and get all the
likes and plot it. Oh my God, you're so caring. I know the cops are so wrong. Like they're
treating these poor black people so badly. And you can, I mean, I think people who are
sort of affluent upper middle class people, they have a mistaken view of what sort of poverty
looks like. Their only exposure to it is when they see, when they see it reported in the media,
when it's a criminal who's committed some kind of transgression, and that surfaces up, and then
they learn about the criminal's backstory, and they start to feel sympathetic and so on and so
forth. And there's not nearly as much time spent on the victims of that person's crime. And so in
often what happens is that in at least the imagination of this strata of society that,
you know, they conflate poverty with criminality. And the reason why someone commits crimes is
because they're poor without really digging into the data or the research and understanding that
the vast majority of poor people never commit any crimes. They're more, they're far more likely to
be victims of crime than a perpetrator. And they don't really think about this. And then through
the sort of portrayal of poverty, I think in pop culture is kind of mistaken to at least in more
sort of recent media, where, you know, very few TV shows, it's just not exciting to see
some working class person making, you know, minimum wage, going to work,
clocking in, clocking out, going home to their family and living a normal life.
But it's more interesting to see, you know, the struggling school teacher who decides to break
bad and start cooking meth and lashing out at the system. And that's just a much more
interesting story. And so that is, I mean, there was this movie that came out, I think it was last
year, the year before Emily the criminal with Aubrey Plaza, I don't know if you saw it, but
it was, I mean, it was like the perfect kind of movie for this, for this, you know, the luxury
belief class. It's this young woman who works in food catering, and she has this dickhead boss.
And she has dream, I think she is a college graduate, she has dreams of being an artist,
but she has difficulty monetizing her artwork. And so she caters food. But then she like gets
hooked in with this gang and like, learns how to shoplift. And, you know, the whole thing is like,
you know, well, you know, screw the system, you know, I can't make money off my artwork,
and I have to work in food catering. And this is just ridiculous. And so I'm gonna,
you know, start stealing and robbing people. And the movie is portraying this as like a
perfectly reasonable course of action, right? And this is like, it's basically like breaking bad,
but the young woman version for art. Yeah, yeah. And yeah, I just think it's that's,
that's part of what drives the luxury beliefs phenomenon.
Yeah, it's wild, man. And when you see that, you really can't unsee it. Mary Harrington had this
about a lot of the advances that were proposed by the feminist movement in the 50s, 60s, and 70s
were put forward by women for whom the impact wouldn't affect them. So a perfect example is,
I guess, the push toward independence and the derogation of chivalry by men, because chivalry
in some ways can be patronizing, must be patronizing to women, like I can open the door for myself,
I can carry my own bags, right? Like I can pull my own chair out, I can pay for my own dinner.
And in a world where women are trying to find and establish themselves socioeconomically as
independent agents, aside from the husband or partner that they're supposed to need,
I can understand why that would be the case. But as she said, it is a direct line from
men shouldn't open the door and don't need to, to why you shouldn't hit your wife,
right? Because the consensus is women are more fragile, vulnerable, and need to be protected,
and men should be the ones that do that protecting. And it's the women who are married to men who had
a two-pound household, who had a relatively good example of how to treat women when they were growing
up, who have been through all of the institutions that have kind of softly embedded what chivalry
is in any case, because that's just the way that a more sophisticated social life goes.
But that doesn't think about women who are in an underclass or working-class environment,
who are in a relationship with a guy who never knew his father, whose mom was cycling in and out
of different boyfriends or partners or whatever in the house, who was maybe abused physically or
verbally or emotionally or whatever while they were growing up, all of whose friends are
ruffians that are going about and anti-social behavior and all of this stuff. And it's like,
well, I know that for you, lady that drives a Mercedes-Benz, you might like the idea of being
liberated from men holding the door open for you, but downstream from that, you've also liberated
women from being protected from their underclass partner from hitting them when he gets annoyed
on a nighttime. And I really, I just thought that that was such an interesting frame. The same thing
goes for support for abortion rights, right? When you think about that, I think that it is skewed
toward the people in the upper class believe that it is a great idea to restrict abortion rights
overall, to give less access. But you think, well, maybe if you were woman 213 of one particular
village somewhere who's six kids deep to three different men, maybe easy access to birth control
would be a good thing for them to have. And yeah, it's just, it's so interesting how it can be
split up by race or it can be split up by class or it can be split up within gender.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that was, I mean, it's interesting because I think that
a lot of the people who promote these views or who think that these are sort of progressive or
fashionable or enlightened, they don't think about how it would affect someone outside of
their social strata, or they mistakenly overextend the way that they think to everyone else that,
well, here's what would be good for me, or here's what would be good for my
class or my group, and therefore would be good for everyone, or the only reason why other people
aren't thinking like me or aren't pursuing the same kind of life as me is because they don't have the
same, or because my preferences aren't aren't implemented in society or throughout culture.
I mean, yeah, what you said earlier about Mary Harrington's point is interesting. I mean,
I saw this firsthand that where I grew up, basically anyone, anyone like, you know,
who was remotely sort of academically inclined, you know, went off to some state university,
everyone who wasn't, but still had some sort of restlessness or ambition, they joined the military,
and then all the guys who were left behind, I mean, there's, you know, not much left for
the women there to pick from. And a lot of these guys did grow up without dads or without good
sort of male role models around. And yeah, I mean, yeah, what ends up happening often is like,
you know, women get, you know, they have children with multiple men, or the men,
you know, they have multiple partners and don't interact with their kids. I mean, I, you know,
I now have friends that I graduated from high school with who are these guys. And yeah, it's
just, it looks very different, right? Like that, the sort of liberation and the belief that, you
know, women don't need a man or men shouldn't, you know, women can live the same kind of life as
a man. And maybe it's true if you are affluent and you go off to college and you're going to be a
young professional career driven person, but if you're just working a menial job and you're,
I mean, most people aren't going to derive a ton of satisfaction from the way that they make money.
Well, there's a story that you, I remember you telling me maybe about some lady friend that
you'd spoken to about, she said that we should be able to move beyond the nuclear family because
it's restrictive and constraining. Yeah, yeah, this was someone I graduated from Yale with. We were
somehow got on the topic of family and future and this kind of thing. And she was basically telling
me that, yeah, marriage is this outdated patriarchal institution and we should society should move
beyond it. We should evolve, get past it. And so I asked her, well, how did you grow up? What was
your family life situation when you were a child? And she said, I was raised by my mom and my dad
and I did have that kind of conventional family. And then I asked her what she planned to do later
in her, because she was planning to, she was working at a technology firm, she was going to
go to law school, but I asked her in her future when she has a family or if she wanted a family,
what would she do? And she said, oh yeah, I do want a family someday and I'll probably get married
and have a husband and essentially get married and like partake in this outdated patriarchal
institution. And so I was thinking that, okay, you benefited from this age old, ancient sort of
patriarchal, but this institution and you plan to carry the benefits of that arrangement forward
for your own children. But your official public position is no one should do this, it's outdated,
she was sort of denigrating it, trying to downplay it, saying other people shouldn't do this.
And to me, it seemed very duplicitous that this clearly marriage has positive benefits. I mean,
that was something that I learned when I got to college was almost every single one of my classmates
and peers came from two parent families, whereas where I grew up, it was basically zero. And so
clearly marriage had some kind of effect here. And yet the place, the group that is the most
likely to downplay the benefits of marriage are the most likely to be products of successful
marriages under the most likely to form marriages themselves. How come you're not more bitter
about your childhood? I mean, I used to be, I used to actually be more angry when I was
in my late teens, early 20s. I mean, I think part of it was just getting older. I think just age,
things just kind of tend to like burn out in dim over time anyway. And I think the other was just
a lot of sort of self focused work, self improvement, trying to get past it and put it all into context
and realize that on the one hand, people are responsible for what they do in their lives.
But on the other, I mean, to understand the sort of, to understand the genealogy of the ideas that
led us to this point, that's been helpful too, to understand that, yes, like day to day we have
agency over our lives, but the sort of, there are these decisions and cultural trajectories and
all of these other forces that are in place that play a role too. And so, you know, when I start
to dig at the root of this of who is responsible for some of these ideas, who promotes the luxury
beliefs and so on, and entering into institutions where I can see it, it helps me to just understand
it. And I think that sort of settles my anger a bit too. It's very interesting thinking about that.
I had a sea traveler on, she's a psychotherapist pushing back very hard against what she calls
Instagram therapy, which is identifying everybody as a victim and that they've got trauma and stuff.
And she said,
remembering that you experience trauma isn't being a victim, making your identity out of it is.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think that's well put. I mean, I didn't really, I didn't really think
of myself as a victim and people didn't call me a victim. I never thought on those terms until
I got to college. Before that, it was just day to day life. I mean, it was just, you know,
trying to struggling to get by trying to make money trying to whatever living paycheck to
paycheck and then later joining the military and you know, I just my, my plate was full later.
You know, sort of towards the end of my enlistment before I entered college, I did do a stint in
rehab and I talked to therapists and you know, I did sort of address a lot of the issues that
I had experienced when I was a kid. And that was helpful too, I think to just sort of contextualize
it and also to just sort of be more open with the people I grew up with and close with, you know,
my sister and my mom and all these people to just my adoptive family to talk to them about all of
this. I mean, that's helpful too. I think there is this, this tendency for young people, young
men in particular that, you know, self-sufficiency will solve all your problems to just be completely
self-reliant. You don't have to rely on anyone, you know, your, your relationships are sort of
peripheral. And I lived that way for a while and it probably did help to sort of, I don't know,
led me to equip myself to be, you know, a self-sufficient person. But later, you know, I did
realize that actually relationships are important. I mean, I went through the first six years
after I left home. I never visited. I never visited for the holidays. I never visited her
for any kind of special occasions. I mean, I did visit like, you know, on and off whenever,
you know, really whenever it suited my schedule, I was very selfish. But then later, you know,
now I make an effort, now I make an effort to do all of those things and realize that actually,
you know, all of these things, relationships are more important than you think, especially when
you're young, right? There is, there's value there, even if you think there isn't.
Yeah, there's a degree of romanticism about monk mode and loan-rangering it. And I think my
current theory on this is that monk mode is a great tool, but a bad master.
Because if you continue to pray at the altar of it over a long enough amount of time, the reason
that you're doing some equivalent of monk mode, right, which is a over-reliance on self-sufficiency,
introspection and isolation so that you can focus on making yourself into a better version of you,
because quite rightly, there are a lot of distractions out there in the world. And if
you're trying to do a ton of self-work, are you going to therapy or you're in rehab,
you're probably not going to have the most flourishing social life. It's going to be difficult
for you to juggle all of these plates. And if you do try and juggle all of the plates, you're going
to restrict your progress in that area. Like committing yourself to one thing or a very narrow
band of things is more than, it's not additive, it's multiplicative, right? It allows you to
triple down, quadruple down all of your efforts into one very tight area. And I found myself
toward the end of my twenties, through my manopause, that I really, really enjoyed monk mode. But I
saw, especially for someone that has introverted tendencies, and I get my energy mostly from
being on my own a lot of the time, that it started to become more alluring to me than being back out
into the world. But the problem with that is the reason that you're doing the monk mode thing or
the rehab thing or whatever, is to form yourself into a functional member of society who can then
go and reintegrate. And that's the problem that the progress can become addictive to the point
where it stops you from doing the thing you're like, the thing that you're doing is sacrificing
the thing that you were doing it in order to get. Yeah. Yes. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you sort of mistake
the, the means for the end, the end goal, you're sort of, yeah, yeah, it's, I think it's difficult
to keep that in mind. I think a lot of people have difficulty with that, especially when you're
young, you, like, what, what are your actions attempting to accomplish? What's your overarching
goal? You know, Robert Green makes that distinction between tactician versus strategist, right? The
tactician is just what's directly in front of you? What do you need to do next? And the strategist is,
well, what's all of this for? Like, what are each of those steps trying to get you to? And I think,
yeah, when you're young, you just think, oh, I want to make money. And like, money becomes the
thing. And it's like, well, what's the money for? Like, what do you want to do with that money
when you build up your bank account? What is that the goal is just to have a big number
on your balance? Or is it to take care of your loved ones, to have the freedom to be able to
interact with people that you care about and to provide and those kinds of things. And I think I,
I mean, I kind of came to that realization when I was in my mid 20s, but it wasn't until in my
later 20s, really probably right, not until I was about to start grad school, I was like 20, 28,
but I really had that realization that, oh, the reason why I'm working so hard and trying to
get educated and successful and trying to make money and all these things is so that I could
take care of my, my current family, my adoptive family, but then also for if and when I have a
family later, we'll say when, that I'll be able to take care of them too in a way that I lacked
when I was a kid. And that's what ultimately, all of these things are for. It's not just to
whatever, increase the numbers on my social media or on my balance or something like that.
So your background, the life that you went through to where you ended up,
Air Force? Yeah, Air Force. Air Force, US Air Force, GI Bill, Yale, Cambridge,
PhD book, you know, it's going to be an amazing selling book, all the rest of the stuff.
What do you attribute that trajectory to, given that your friends with so many of the
people that you grew up with that are still, they're the guy, they're that guy with
three baby mamas and a bunch of alimony or whatever, and they're in the same town in the
same whatever, what was formative or what, what do you attribute the change in you to that the
other people didn't? I mean, there are probably, you know, there's a variety of factors. I think one
is, you know, you do need to have like a certain amount of like innate drive or ambition in the
first place. And that I'm not entirely sure you can, you can, you can drill that into people.
So you have to have that sort of raw material in the first place. But one point that I try to
make in the book is that things could have very easily gone a different direction. I think having
sort of aptitude and drive and ambition, those are necessary but not sufficient that there are a
lot of guys I think who are sort of smart and talented and ambitious, but they're just surrounded
by chaos and disorder and, you know, lack opportunity or, or they've just been sort of beaten down by
life so much that they don't even think to like spot the opportunities that are around you
and capitalize on them. And so, so that was there. So I think some of the raw material was
probably there. And then the other thing was just making this, you know, kind of halfway impulsive
decision when I was 17 to just enlist and get out of my hometown. And I kind of knew that,
you know, I, at this point, you know, I'd had two jobs when I was in high school,
I was a dishwasher at a restaurant. And then I was a bag boy at a grocery store. And
I kind of looked around at my coworkers who were a little older than me. These were guys,
you know, this kind of guy in their early to mid twenties, you know, maybe they like some of them
like they were like 24, but had a girlfriend in high school. And they were just like kind of creepy,
weird stoner guy or the guy who, you know, would ride a dirt bike and, you know, just like smoke
a lot of weed in the parking lot and just, you know, kind of aimless and adrift. And I thought
like, I, I think now when you're 17 or 18, that's kind of cool to live that life. But when you're
24 or 28, like that's kind of pathetic. And even when I was a teenager, I had that thought that,
you know, sometimes my friends and I would ask these guys to like get us beer, hook us up with
weed or whatever. And, you know, some part of me, I was, I was like happy they were doing it. But
on the other hand, I was like, why are you doing this for us, man? Like, what kind of loser is
hanging out with a bunch of high schoolers? And I don't want to be like the weird old guy at the
high school party when I'm that age. And so, you know, a variety of factors led me to just enlist
right away. I barely graduated high school. I mean, I was smart. And that's the other point that I
try to make in the book is that a lot of people want to blame the school system or that there's
something wrong with teachers or we aren't paying them enough. And so, and maybe some of those things
are true, but teachers aren't dumb. Like most teachers get into that profession because they
care about kids and they want them to do well. And they're usually pretty observant about like,
which kids are sort of curious and academically inclined. And my teachers could see that in me,
but I just had no motivation or desire to do well in school. It just wasn't there for me.
And so, my teachers were just continually frustrated by me. And so, yeah, I enlist,
I get out of there, basic training, I get stationed, I spend some time overseas and sort
of have that structure around me. A couple of days ago, I spoke with a mutual friend of ours,
Polina Pompliano. And she asked me this question of, when I read your book and I read about what
you were like when you were a teenager, when you were in high school, and then I meet you now,
like it just doesn't, like there's a disconnect, I don't understand it. And I explained that I was
in the Air Force for eight years. Like that's a long time. Like I was in from 17 to 25. And,
you know, the book, I kind of like gloss over because it's kind of mind-numbing and boring,
but it's like, you know, make your bed, you know, like make sure your uniform is, you know,
perfect. Jordan Peterson bootcamp. Exactly. It is kind of like that, especially for the first
six months to a year when you're in training, it's like, you're not a, you're not a person,
you're just like a cog in this machine of just like, you know, like cleaning and being meticulous
about every little aspect of your existence. And I hated it. I hated every second of it.
But it was important for me to go through that, to like learn the skills that I kind of lacked
when I was growing up of just like, here's how to be an adult, here's how to take care of yourself,
here's how to dress properly, and like even basic things, right?
What were the most surprising, I think this would be a nice framing, actually,
as you move up through the cacophosphere of different social strata,
what were the most surprising realizations going from Rob 1.0 to Rob 2.0, which is, I guess,
from teenager to being in the Air Force? What were the things where you're like, oh my god,
like that's an expectation or a social convention, or that's a way of operating,
or it's a belief or whatever? I mean, I think probably one of the bigger ones was
just like learning the distinction between like self-discipline and motivation,
because I lacked, I really lacked both when I was a teenager. You know, I didn't feel motivated to
do well, but I also had, I had no external discipline around me really. I mean, I had it in sort of
fits and starts in different periods. It was just a very sort of chaotic early life. But
I had no self-discipline, certainly. Like I couldn't impose on myself. It just, you know,
I didn't, I didn't have the tools to do that. But then in the military, I learned it that,
you know, at first it was imposed from on high that this is how you will do things.
And then it gets drilled into you. And then you just learn on your own, like, oh, this is how
you get things done is motivation is, you know, so they're the distinction, the motivation is just
a feeling. It's like, do I want to do this or not? And if I don't want to do it, I lack the
motivation and I'm just not going to do it. Whereas self-discipline is, I'm going to do this
regardless of how I feel. And so, you know, for some people, it may make sense in the context of,
like, going to the gym, that I don't feel like going to the gym today. But self-discipline is,
it doesn't matter how you feel, like, oh, you have a feeling who cares, like, what are your
actions? What are you actually going to do now? Ignore those feelings and do what you've set out
to do. And so it was like that for my work, for things like, I mean, even showing up to work on
time. I mean, it's kind of sad, but I was one of the better workers at my jobs in high school.
And even then, I was, like, not on time, half the time, like, it didn't matter. I didn't feel
like it. And then the military was, if you don't show up to work on time, you get court-martialed
and you go to military prison. That's the life. And once I learned, like, to operate by those
standards and those regulations, those policies, that it dawned on me that actually, you know,
Jaco has this phrase, discipline equals freedom, that once you sort of outsource all of your decisions
to this sort of regimented system, then suddenly, like, life gets better. And you do have more freedom.
You have the freedom to think about other things or to direct your attention to certain projects or
goals or ideas. And you don't have to live your life in this constant state of chaos of, oh,
I don't have any money now, you know, like that, you just, you know, set the set, set the system so
that your money goes here. And this is what you're going to do. And you go to work at this time.
And this is when you leave. And this is what's, and having that regimented system was really
important for me. And now I just, you know, I do it, it's second nature to me, but it took
eight years to get there. So yeah, I think those, those kinds of things, discipline was the big one.
What do people who didn't grow up in poverty not know about what it's like to grow up in poverty?
I mean, I think, I think poverty, poverty is
it's an interesting
question because I think a lot of people actually attempt to,
they attempt to imagine it. I know a lot of people actually who didn't grow up poor, but who
at least try to imagine what it would have been like to be poor. And I think like the,
the imagination probably isn't too far off from the reality that there are certain things that
you want, but maybe you can't get, or if you want a toy or a certain food or a certain thing that,
you know, I think poverty now for at least in sort of developed first world countries,
very few people are actually starving in the street, but it's more like, you know, I, I want to get,
you know, maybe it's like a special occasion and I want to rent a video game at Blockbuster,
but that's $6. And we're only going to let you rent a movie because it's $3. Like those kinds
of like weird, small things. And you can only go on a special occasion for your birthday or
something. It's not like a weekly occurrence. The other thing is like the, I think like the,
the social environment is something people don't think about as well, that what family life
and communities look like in poor and working class areas now are much different than,
than they, than they used to look like. I mean, I cite this statistic in my book about how
in the 1960s, 95% of children in the US, regardless of social class, were raised by
both of their birth parents. And then by 2005, for the upper class, it had dropped to 85%. So
there was a slight dip, but by and large, that's the norm still. Whereas for working class families
in the US, working class children, it dropped from 95% to 30%. And that was 2005. My guess is
it's dropped a little bit further than that now. And so just to give a sort of a glimpse into this,
I mean, there was, I had five close friends growing up in high school. And so there was me
sort of raised in foster homes and adopted, but there were divorces and other kinds of drama.
I had two friends raised by single moms, one friend raised by a single dad, I had another
friend who was raised by his grandma because his dad was in prison and his mom was addicted to drugs.
And that's kind of like the normal situation when you go to like, if you go to a high school
in one of these areas and just start asking people about their parents or their families,
they'll start describing about dads in prison or moms in drugs or, you know, I'm staying with my
aunt right now because my mom is in rehab or whatever. Very chaotic. Yeah, it's just total.
Yeah, it's just totally chaotic and disorderly. And this is a point that I've made in my writing is
that, you know, childhood poverty is not, and again, this is in the context of the US and,
you know, first world countries, that childhood poverty is not really very strong predictor
of harmful or detrimental outcomes later in life. The correlation is either very weak or
not significant at all between growing up poor and growing up to commit crimes or
self defeating behaviors, harm, violence, drug addiction, unemployment, all of these kinds of
social pathologies, there's a very sort of tenuous connection there. But for childhood instability
and those undesirable outcomes, there's a strong and consistent correlation there.
And so childhood instability is measured by things like, you know, were you raised by both
of your birth parents? Was there a divorce? How many different adults moved in and out of your
home? How frequently did you relocate? Basically, how much day to day disorder was there in your
life? How much uncertainty was there? And that actually does seem to have a very strong effect
on childhood development, on their expectations, on their goals for themselves. And what's
interesting is that when researchers control for childhood family income, the link remains
strong, it remains significant between instability and outcomes. And so one way to think about this is,
you know, if there's a rich family, but there's a lot of drama and chaos and divorce and addiction
and domestic issues, a child raised in that environment is much more likely to have detrimental
outcomes, more likely to commit crimes or become addicted to substances or just, yeah,
have issues, you know, children out of wedlock or multiple with multiple partners versus a child
who was raised by two very low income parents who are married, who are very focused on creating a
stable and secure life for their kids. And you can kind of see this, I think, with like immigrant
families and low income families that haven't really been quite afflicted by a lot of the
pathologies that have occurred in the US. And so I think that's important to remember too,
it's that yes, there's this poverty component, but there's also just this kind of, sometimes I
wonder if poverty is even the right word for the way that I grew up. I think squalor is probably
a more accurate term is like, you know, there was a bit of that material impoverishment, but it was
more just people like living in a very kind of ugly and almost like masochistic way of just,
you know, careless and impulsive and, you know, sort of drug addled.
What's the mechanism that you think is causing that to happen? What is it about, it's so universal
that this unstable, disorganized upbringing, regardless of class or material wealth,
seems to have such negative impacts predictively down, what do you think's the mechanism there?
I mean, you know, I probably some of it would be genetics, but I'm not sold that it's 100%.
All right, people that are quick to anger, externalizing behavior as parents give the
raw materials of externalizing behavior to kids, right? I think that's really good.
I think that's like one piece of it, but I think that...
Robert Ploman Rains Supreme.
Yeah, exactly. And I think, yeah, that would be the Robert Ploman answer,
you know, but I do think that that can't explain 100% of it because, you know, if you just,
so for example, if you just look at white Americans over time, like all of the same things
have occurred across social classes that actually, you know, 50, 60 years ago,
I mean, I'll give you an example just for my adoptive family. So my adoptive family
are basically white working class people on my mother's side. And so my grandparents,
you know, they were, you know, they grew up basically during the Great Depression
and they got, you know, but they got married, you know, my grandfather and my grand...
They would tell me this story about how my grandfather asked my grandmother to marry him.
And I think he was 18 or 19 and she was like 17. And she, you know, they were just like two,
the only two young people in this town. And, you know, and she was like, I'll marry you,
but you have to stop smoking, stop drinking, stop gambling. And he was like, done and done,
they got married and they had a 60 plus...
Let's have sex.
Yeah, exactly. Well, yeah, they had, I think they had four or five kids.
Lots of sex.
Yeah. And they were married for 60 plus years, no issues. I'm sure they had
issues, but like, you know what I mean? And then they had four kids, all four kids divorced.
And, you know, I just, you know, they, they had married, they did get married,
but then they ended up getting divorced. You know, some of them had, you know,
kids, step kids, that kind of thing. Now, I'm a member of the next generation and I'm seeing
my cousins and it's like, it's not even marriage. It's just like, oh, like they hooked up and had
a kid, but he hasn't spoken to his kid in, you know, three years and, you know, so that's what
it looks like now. And I don't think the genetics in this family lineage changed much.
It was the social environment, it's the incentives, it's the denigration of marriage.
It's, and I don't even, you know, people will point to economic factors, but my grandparents
were very, they were probably poorer than, they're definitely poorer than my cousins now,
you know, like they could not afford the things that my same age, you know, 30 year old cousins
could afford. So it wasn't an economic issue. I think a lot of it was just cultural of what
are your expectations? I think a lot of it has to do with a lot of the stuff that you and I have
talked about and you speak about on your podcast around incentives, around sex and romance and
dating and just, yeah, in the 19, what is it, the 1940s, 1950s, my grandparents generation,
it was like, you know, if you wanted to have sex, you had to like live a certain kind of life,
exactly. And that was, that was just the reality then. And now it's, it's completely different.
And I've presented this thought experiment before, I think I posted this on, on back when it was
still called Twitter, which was if you traveled back to 1945, just got in a time machine and walked
out in the post war era, and you said, and you know, very soon, I think it was 1960 when the
birth control pill was invented, you say very soon, it's going to be this magical technology,
the birth control pill. So contraceptives will be widely available. Abortion will be, you know,
it'll be more accessible, definitely certainly than it is now. So you'll have, you know, the,
all of these reproductive options before you. Do you think in the future, there will be more
children born out of wedlock or fewer? Do you think that there will be more abortions or fewer?
Do you think there will be more children raised in foster homes or orphanages living in chaos and
squalor, more or less? And I think, you know, almost everyone that you speak to in 1945,
you present this survey, I think almost every one of them would say less, they would say fewer.
And then, you know, I, but that's not the case. It was very much the opposite of that, that I
think even these technologies and, you know, and the culture and everything sort of went in a,
in a very different direction than I think people had predicted.
Mary Eberstadt came on the show. And Adam and Eve and the pill revisited a new version of her
old book. Fantastic. Just so great. And it's true, man. Like, you know, we look back, and it's kind
of cool in the red pill, manosphere, even in the EP world, you know, the social psychology world,
for people to almost laugh, snigger at how rudimentary the thinking was in the 1960s that
introducing birth control would result in better outcomes in terms of abortion, better outcomes
in terms of out of wedlock births. But who then would have been able to predict that that was
what was going to happen? You're talking like a fourth order effect, right? Like, okay, so you're
going to decrease shotgun weddings because the onus is going to go from the male that accidentally
impregnated to the woman who quote unquote chose, right? It went from a man's mistake to a woman's
option. And you go, okay, right. And then, and then what's going to happen to that? And what's
going to happen to that? But it's like, it's so far down the line. I was talking to Scott Galloway.
And, you know, he was talking about the predictive power of stuff in the past. And he was saying,
you know, he'd looked through, combed through some research about the Great Depression and had
looked for anybody. Anyone predict this? It's like the year before the Great Depression in the 20s.
No one, nothing, not a Cassandra in sight. And yet in retrospect, you go,
how could no one have seen this coming? You know, hindsight is a wonderful thing with regards to
that. One question that I've got that I think is kind of interesting is, so squalor, your word,
uh, up until the age of 16, 17, 17, until the age of 17, that should set a pretty low
hedonic threshold, right? That you're in a nice air conditioned room, and your jeans fit and don't
have holes in, and you're not worrying about whether or not you can pay for the Uber to get
from here to the airport. How have you found your ability to, uh, hedonically adapt over time?
Like, can you recall that as an anchor for your quality of life? Or does it almost seem
like it's someone else that lived that? That's, oh, that's an interesting question. Um,
I guess it's, it's a bit of both. I mean, it's, it's a day to day, I think. I don't really, yeah,
I don't really reflect in that way. You know, you just sort of live your life. But when I reflect
back and when I think about it and I realize, you know, there are those moments where like,
wow, like I can do this thing that I couldn't have done, you know, even, even after I was in the
middle, I mean, the, I think the pay structures probably changed a bit when I enlisted in 2007.
I was, you know, I think the, the, I was making like $1,200 a month was the, the pay. And so I
couldn't afford a belt, you know, like, it was like small little things like that. Like, you know,
once I cover, you know, because I moved, yeah, once I moved off base, I got this house with my
friends, but you know, you have to pay like first, yeah, it's so funny now, like it doesn't matter
to me because I can, you know, I can, I have money, but back then it was like,
like, like panicking. I was like, you have to pay the first month and the last month's rent up front.
And then it's like a security deposit. And then it's this and then you have to, and then like gas
to commute back and, and all of these kinds of things and calculating all of this. And it's like,
oh, well, I guess I can't wear a belt for a couple of weeks and come on next paycheck. It's like that.
It sucks. And, and so, you know, so there are times like that where I'm like, oh, I could just buy
this without thinking about it. And that that part is nice. So I think it is that kind of,
you know, like happiness researchers will do this. What is it like, they have terms for this,
it's like life, life satisfaction versus, I think they may just call it happiness,
where like happiness is like your, your actual affective state in the moment day to day and how
much positive versus negative emotion are you experiencing subjectively throughout the day
or the week or whatever. And then there's the life satisfaction component, which is
basically when you step back and view your life as a whole, how satisfied are you? And
those two things are correlated, but they're not quite the same in some ways.
I think parents often report much lower levels of happiness, but higher levels of life satisfaction.
Yes. And, and I think in that regard, it's like, you know, my happiness,
I don't know if it's actually changed much. Maybe there is a bit of that hedonic adaptation where,
you know, 15 years ago, it was like, oh, I can, you know, I can go to Wendy's,
cool, like I'm happy. Whereas now it's, you know, something else, but, but ultimately that
hasn't changed. But the life satisfaction, I'm sure is, is much higher that like, oh, I've had
a few accomplishments and I can afford things. I don't have to think about money as much anymore.
And so yeah, I think there is that. And yeah, and also like reminiscing too, like when I talked
to my sister or some of my, my old friends from high school and just sort of thinking about those
days, it's like, you know, I do feel a bit better now about my life compared to what I was.
I was talking to a friend and they were asking me stuff about my childhood and my memory is really
patchy from my childhood. It's not fantastic, especially not sort of pre 10. And I said,
look, like what, what do you remember? I said, well, I remember a good bit because of my sister,
because we'll prompt each other about that. Oh, do you remember that? Oh my God. Yeah,
we did do that thing. And we were in that car or we got stuck in the, the mud or whatever, right?
And yeah, there's a degree where I wonder how much is just one good chat GPT prompt away
from me, you know, opening out into this really beautiful answer about some insight or whatever
some experience that I had as a kid. But yeah, George Mack, my friend, once a month lies in bed
before he wakes up for 10 minutes and imagines what it would be like to live with no arms or legs.
That's one of his favorite meditations among a bunch of other weird ones. So he's trying to
dial up contrast as much as possible. Think about all of the challenges that I would have
to face. Think about what this day is going to entail. Think about all of the things that
would be difficult for me. Think about how grateful I would be if only I could just,
you know, wash my own back if only I could brush my own teeth if only I could do these things.
So what he's trying to do is give himself gratitude for the things that he takes for
granted that are very normal. Now, the interesting thing with your example is that you don't need
to imagine what it would be like to live in squalor because you did. But the way that our
sense of self works, you know, what is it? Every seven years, every cell in your body has turned
over. So there isn't even, you're like the two ship of these three, three, three ship of theseus
is away from the person that you were then. And even for me now, being in Austin for two years,
I went back home for Christmas. And it's like, it's kind of like a fever dream. I'm being back in
this place that I know so well, but I'm different, but I'm not. And then I find triggers, environmental
triggers causing me to fall back into other different ways of thinking and stuff like that.
So I was interested in whether or not basically you have been able to lock in a degree of gratitude,
like relativistic gratitude, I suppose, based on where you came from to where you are now.
But it's a permanent, a permanent battle. Like in some regards, from a poverty perspective,
you were a guy who was born with no arms or legs and then grew them.
That's right. If I think about what it was like back then, and I compare it to now,
of course, things are much better for me. And yeah, I mean, it would be, I think,
shameful to be anything other than completely grateful and just full of gratitude for-
And proud as well, I would like to think.
Yeah. I mean, that's a weird one. I think that's one of the things that, in the book,
I point this out, that when you don't really grow up with parents and you don't really,
I mean, because I grew up in foster homes before, I think there's the developmental
window where if you don't really receive positive feedback, I think I just like,
I receive compliments in a very weird way where it's very hard for me to accept it.
It's a skill. It's a real skill, man. Who is it that I gave someone a compliment?
Fuck, I can't remember who it was. I gave somebody a compliment and I've never seen
anyone. I wish I could remember who it was, but it would probably be a good idea that I
couldn't call them out in any case. Dude, it's like the worst way that I've ever seen anyone
take a compliment. Just, you know, you say this thing that you think is a nice gift that you're
giving somebody, and even giving compliments is a skill that I've had to learn because I'm
doing something that's nice for somebody else is a nice thing to do.
Gwinda. It was fucking Gwinda. It was on an episode that I did recently, and I was like,
dude, I fucking adore your writing. I adore your sub-stack. You've got two bucks coming out.
I can't wait to read them. I'm fired up every single time I speak to you on the podcast. I
love it. It's like a fugue state we drop into for two hours. It's brilliant.
I just saw his face. People can go watch the episode. It's very charming. It's very charming
because obviously he holds himself to a high standard and stuff like that. But you see this
guy go like, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's hard. It's very charming. Well, the other day I had this,
this interaction with one of my friend's mothers, and you know, she was like very high energy,
and she was like, oh, you know, Rob, I love your writing. And now it's like, I love your sub-stack,
and I've watched you on modern wisdom. It's like, it's so great. And at first I was like,
you know, oh, that's nice. Thank you. You know, trying to like change the subject. I just like,
I feel like all these compliments, and I just feel uncomfortable. I'm like, that's really
nice of you. Thank you so much. And then she's like, no, really, she's like, did you really get a
PhD from Cambridge? Because that's amazing. And then like, I started to walk away feeling like,
damn, I feel pretty good about myself actually. Like, can I have you hung around all the time?
Eventually, I was like, you know, I was suddenly getting this like really positive mom energy.
And I was like, this is great. Like, actually, but it took a second, right? At first I was like,
you know, just fell into that sort of default, like, oh, very kind of you to say, thank you so
much. And then she kept going with it. And I'm like, wow, this is a really nice slate.
You're like, kind of the equivalent of a really, obviously overweight person
who can't just go in the gym and do a little bit. It's like, hey, we've got to shift 250 pounds.
You need to stay on that treadmill for another hour, Mr. And then you finish and you're like,
oh, wow, like, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. There's like a crushing weight of compliments that you
need. But that's something I'd loved. I've got, who wrote No More Mr. Nice Guy? Robert Glover.
Thank you. I've got Dr. Robert Glover coming on the show soon. I'm very excited to speak to him.
And I'd love to talk about the skill of both accepting and giving compliments. I think that
that's a really underrated skill. The ability to give an earnest compliment and to graciously,
but honestly receive it. Right. Skill that no one really ever talks about.
That is interesting. Yeah, I think from, at least my impression is it's actually
easier to deliver a compliment than to receive it. Way easier.
Because you can be sincere about it. Like, you can honestly show your appreciation if you enjoy
something to tell someone. But yeah, I've, yes, seen, this seems to be a common pattern that
people have difficulty with receiving them. More so with guys maybe, than girls, although even then.
That's an interesting one. Because with women, for sure, they hide ambition. They downplay success
and stuff like that. Certainly, female to female communication, I think there is
more opaqueness and more fuckery that goes on with regards to that. If a guy thinks that you've
done something shit, they go, dude, that was lame. Whereas it might be couched in some other
sort of language from a woman. Yeah, that'd be interesting. I'd love someone to look at
since the versus insincerity compliments from comparing men and women. That'd be a fascinating
study. This morning, I was, I was prepping a newsletter. It'll go out tomorrow. You know,
I do like a three, you know, interesting findings. Everyone needs to go to Rob's
substack and subscribe. It's outstanding. Thank you, man.
And I shamelessly repurpose at least one thing every like couple of weeks.
You know, I think like, well, the findings deserved as wide an audience as possible,
but this was an interesting one. It'll go out where, so this was a study from 1988. I'd be
curious to see, like, I don't, I couldn't find anything more recent, but essentially,
they broke down by gender, the domain of, of, of where people deliver their compliments. And so
for women, it was, when women compliment women versus when men compliment men,
what are they complimenting? For women, it was mostly appearance. It was like something like
60% of the compliments were about appearance. And then it was like 15% about possessions and 10%
about accomplishments and that kind of thing. Whereas, so it was mostly appearance based for
women when they're complimenting one another. Whereas for men, it was mostly based on
accomplishments. Most of their compliments to one another were about accomplishments.
And so one thing that I would wonder is like, maybe it's, I wonder if it's kind of easier or,
or more difficult depending on, so, so I would imagine like for women when they receive compliments
about their appearance, because it seems to be the most common domain that they would receive
those quite easily because they're used to it. Whereas for accomplishments, that makes them feel
uncomfortable in some way. And if you're a guy, if I go to you and I'm like,
dude, you're looking buff. Tell me about, tell me about how good my last newsletter was.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I wonder if like we would feel more uncomfortable when it's something
other than, than the target. That's so fascinating. And yet again, it shows just how
people's, people's behaviors zeroes in on the most salient parts of each sex's characteristics.
So women are complimenting the most important thing to the opposite sex.
Men are complimenting the most important thing to the opposite sex. The same thing
happens with derogation as well. You know, if there's an argument between a guy and a woman
on the internet, the woman's going to say he's got small dick energy and the guy's going to call her
a slag, right? That's it. It's like, I'm going to derogate your chastity. I'm going to derogate
your sexual prowess. I'm going to say that you're not as competent or as rich or as good looking
or as like successful as you think you are. And I'm going to say that you're like fatter
older and uglier than you are. Why? Well, those are the most important things that you have with
regards to social currency. And these are the same people who will throw these sorts of insults
around like, you know, Greta Thunberg accused Andrew Tate of having small dick energy. Like
it's, I think it's the third most liked tweet of all time or something like that. I think she's,
I think she's in the top 10 twice. And I think Tate features in the top 10
twice or three times and at least maybe one or two of those are his interactions
with Greta Thunberg. So kind of, I don't know, like,
he's like the Michael Jackson to her Janet Jackson or something like very, very successful when
they get together. Yeah, I think that, yeah, the same people who would probably endorse
like some form of gender blank slate egalitarianism or deny that there are any sort of biologically
based sex differences will still sort of target those areas of insecurity.
It's the same as the Harvard Extension School thing. Right. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. So yeah, that's, yeah. So if, um, yeah, if you're, you know, a very progressive person,
but then a man is annoying you online, you'll immediately start telling him that he's, you
know, a virgin or he's, you know, exactly fucking incel like, oh, okay.
Well, if you throw that debate around, speaking of that,
Alexander Datesyke just put a new study out. Did you see this one? He hasn't released the
details, but he's capturing the data at the moment on it through a Google form.
It's so funny. He's put videos up asking participants to rank the attractiveness of
different red pill influences. Okay. So there's the guys from Fresh and Fit,
who else is in there? I don't know. There's like a bunch of other people that are in there.
And, uh, it's got the replies are so funny. I gotta look at it. So it's on, it's on Twitter.
Like these, these, correct. Him mining for the data is on Twitter. The results aren't,
he's, he's currently, he only put it out yesterday, I think. I gotta look at this.
And, um, dude, I have to, is he on there? I'm not, I'm not, and he's not. He went like more
kind of like another big names within that world or whatever. But, um, he is, Alex has an ability,
I don't think I've ever, ever seen you get into a spat on Twitter. I don't think I,
I don't think you've ever had a back and forth, despite having like hundreds of thousands of
people that follow you. Uh, Gwinda likes to kind of, he's more like a hit man. So he'll sit
upon a ridge and look out and then he'll like fire something. And it's like AOC. It'll be
like a single reply to AOC with 500 likes from him. And then nothing, he won't tweet for another
week. Honestly, he pops out of the wilderness looks and he's like, adjust the site fires
and then leaves. Um, but I mean, Alexander goes in with incels, incel co, uh, that account that
I think is the admin of the incels.co thing. He's back and forth with like anyone, like egg and
non accounts. Like if he sees, and you've got this essay and it's really well written, but, um,
his capacity, he's kind of like the destiny of dating research. You know, he's just got this
predisposition that's very good for being able to put up for anyone that doesn't know who we're
talking about. He's been on the show, Alexander dates, I think it's like at Alex dates, I gone
on Twitter. Just look, whatever day this goes out on, look at who he's going tweets and replies
and have a look at how many people he's arguing with. And I promise you, they'll just be mountains,
like tons and tons and tons. And it's no one, it's nobody. And then sometimes it's a somebody, but
I think he's performing a much needed service because I don't have the patience for that.
I think like, you know, professors and researchers and podcast, like just people who have like a
million things to do. And I think like, but he, he's, he's doing it very well and he's building
an audience this way. And I think, you know, it's, it's, it's, he's channeling his, his knowledge
and his research toward productive ends. And you know, I think it, someone should be engaging
with a lot of these like black pills, you know, it's a fucking high price. Do you see that we got
lumped into, uh, uh, we, we got given a name. Oh, we did me, you, William Costello and Alexander
dates, like, and it's the academic manosphere. Okay. Good company. I like it. I think that's,
that's a pretty good, I was in there. Yeah. I think so. Okay. I think you were. It was a long
time ago on this day. It was like maybe months ago and I did, I forgot to send it to you. But
yeah, the academic, the academic manosphere types, it was used as a slur, but I was like,
yo, if you want this to be a slur, make it less cool of a name. Like it's a fucking dope. I want
to be a part of the academic manosphere. Yeah. Yeah. I got, I got lumped in a couple of years ago
with it was some like, you know, like someone was like trying to create like a league of the IDW.
This was back when the IDW was still, I think it was still a thing or it was kind of on the
way down. It was like 2020, 2021. And yeah, I was like in the minor leagues. It was like, you know,
they're heavy hitters, Eric Weinstein. Yeah. And then it was back then, I don't know what,
I have like 10,000 followers or something. And it was like, that would have been probably after
your university of Austin thing, maybe around about that time. It was before then even, it was
like, you know, I think you and I had just met and it was like still kind of early days. And I
was looking at this, I'm like, I don't want to, you know, like, I like some of the people who
are, were whatever. I don't know if it's not really still a thing anymore, but I like some of
those people are like, I'm not really in this IDW thing. Like, I thought it was kind of, yeah.
So talking about you moving into the real, you know, upper stratosphere, troposphere of
class moving through your time in the Air Force. What about when you got to Yale
first and then Cambridge? What was some of the conventions that really sort of stood out to
you? Because I think this has informed a lot of your ability to sit back and look at these
dynamics and go, oh, isn't that interesting? Because you have an anchoring bias to be able to
compare it to. You're like, I saw this thing, and then I saw this, and then I saw that. So I'm
actually able to observe these dynamics for what they are, rather than kind of, I get to see code
rather than matrix as opposed to have only ever grown up inside of the matrix.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I, so yeah, I arrived on campus 2015 as a, you know, mature student, and
Asian, so looking like a normal age student. I think I had the beard back then. So I had like a
full beard, you know, so this is like a very common thing with vets, where like, because you have to
shave every day, and they like inspect you to make sure it's like, it better be like this morning
you shave, not last night kind of thing. And so as soon as I got on like, you know, I didn't work
out, dude, I think I gained like 20 pounds. Like it was the first semester was bad, where I was like,
I was like, I don't have to work out anymore. Yeah, it was really nice. And then like, I don't,
I like looked in the mirror, like six months in, I was like, I gotta take this. But the first six
months, it was glorious. And so, but yeah, I looked older, I was older, and you know, the
students, some of them would crack jokes about 21 Jump Street, you know, like that kind of thing.
And yeah, it was like the first couple of months or so, nothing really unusual. But then
I saw this very strange, you know, I mentioned before, like witness the kind of birth of this new
politically correct movement where a professor had written an email, essentially defending
freedom of expression on campus later became known as the Yale Halloween Halloween costume
controversy on campus where this was October, the Yale administration released this email,
basically telling the students to, you know, not engage in any cultural appropriation, don't wear
costumes that would be offensive to these groups. And then one of the faculty members on campus
basically wrote an email just to her students in her residential college saying like, do we really
need the administration interfering in our lives? Like, you're all adults, I trust that if you wear
things that maybe you don't other people don't like, you guys can just work it out amongst
yourselves, essentially defending freedom of expression. And in response, hundreds of students
marched around campus, calling for her to be fired. And later for her husband, Nicholas Christakis,
to be fired, saying that she was racist, she was defending cultural appropriation, these students
claim they didn't feel safe on campus. And they were using this kind of language, which I think
like now all of this stuff is kind of spilled out of the universities and we're all kind of familiar
with all this sort of victimhood stuff. But back then I was just completely like flummoxed
that, you know, was like, we're in danger, we, you know, they caused us pain, suffering, we're
under immense harm. You know, this is like a emblematic of, you know, broader systemic forces
that are working against. And I'm looking at these students and like, I know for a fact,
a lot of them were the sons and daughters of millionaires. I remember asking one
young female student, basically, like, can you explain, like, why is this offensive?
I don't understand. And she basically told me I was too privileged to understand why, you know,
why Erica Christakis' email was offensive. Wow. And, you know, she was like some white girl who
like went to private boarding school and like grew up in a rich neighborhood, but she was an activist
and whatever. And so she was like kind of the, is it the Titiana McGrath, like that archetype,
except like, you know, went to Yale and everything. And so, and that was like an interesting thing,
too, was like, on campus, the whole identity politics idea was that if you are a member of
these certain sociological categories, then therefore you are conferred legitimacy to opine
on all of the social ills of the world and how to fix them and so on. But then the students also
placed a great deal of importance on lived experience, you know, and if you live through
something in your life, then therefore you're able to speak about certain things, you're
an authority on those matters. But those two things seem to be, to me, contradictory that,
you know, does it matter what you live through in your life or does it just matter like what
you, what category you belong to? Isn't it interesting that you had 17-year
squalor legitimacy when it comes to lived experience, but the number one thing which is
ignored is class? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. And it was, I mean, yeah, they,
because there are so few people who had my kind of background on campus and because so few
students and graduates of these kinds of universities ever encounter it, it just
isn't on their radar that they don't even think about. I mean, what's really interesting was
that Yale is located in New Haven, which is a really low income kind of blue collar town.
But, you know, they call it the Yale bubble where, you know, the students would only stick
around in this very sort of, you know, enclosed area. But I lived off campus in an apartment
downtown. And so I would walk through like a lot of poverty, a lot of squalor, a lot of addiction.
And, you know, having, you know, 20 minutes earlier heard some student talk about how they
were oppressed. And then I'd see, you know, real poverty and real suffering. And I was just very
difficult for me to sort of reconcile those things. And eventually, like, at first, I tried to be
sympathetic and tried to understand these, you know, these grievances and the students and the
graduates and the faculty and all these, you know, and then eventually I was like, these people have,
you know, they just completely don't understand, they have no connection with it whatsoever. And
some of it I think is legitimately malicious and duplicitous. I would see, for example,
people claim that investment banks were emblematic of capitalist oppression
and say that, you know, these are just, you know, these horrible entities. And then those
same people would be at a recruitment session for Goldman Sachs like two weeks later. And I think,
like, you know, that to be was like, that was a calculated move. Like, and what I mean by that
is like, I don't want to work for them. Yeah, like if they can basically eliminate their rivals
for these prestigious internships, then all the better for them. And so I think some of it was
tactical and calculated. But I think for a lot of people, it's just, you know, their hearts are
in the right place, or they're not really thinking that much about it. And so yeah, this was,
yeah, it was very strange. And then the other thing is, so this is funny, I never knew my
father growing up, and I didn't know who he was or anything about him. And it was only recently,
I took a 23 and me and got the results and found that my father was Mexican. And I went through,
I called up our mutual friend, Rizib Khan, I was like, Hey, can you look at this with me and like
help explain? He's like, Yeah, your dad was like, you know, Mexican, he was like, Indigenous from
North America with some Spanish ancestries, like that's like a perfect, he's like, you grew up in
LA, man, like, what did you expect? And like, okay, so my dad was Mexican. But so when I was at Yale,
before I had this information, I was hanging out in a dorm room with some students. And it was a
friend of mine, who was a Mexican guy. And, you know, he, he was not like, you know, he wasn't
an activist, he wasn't like, woke or whatever. But I took a sombrero off the wall and put it on my
head. And he was joking around, but he said something like, Hey, you know, that's cultural
appropriation, you can't wear that sombrero. I was like, Oh, my bad, you know, joking around. And
then once I got these results back, I was like, wait a minute, I'm allowed to wear that sombrero.
I could wear that sombrero. Get me a poncho, get me some fajitas. And then, and then the next
that I had, but the next that I had was like, this just shows how like how stupid the whole thing
is in the first place, right? Like, someone from my background who didn't know my father, who could
have been like, I could have believed like if I had believed in the cultural appropriation thing,
I could have bought into it. And now what am I supposed to think? Now that I have these DNA
test results. And then I, you know, just like the whole idea of like breaking people down into
like these ethnic categories, and they are or are not allowed to partake in this activity or that
or the other. Like, when when there are people out there who actually don't know who their fathers
are, or don't know, they don't even know what cultural appropriation means. I just think like,
our our attention and our resources and our time are spent on such such frivolous nonsense.
But is it the tyranny of small differences? What's that thing?
Yeah, the narcissism of small differences. That's it. Yeah, that the smaller the differences between
people, the bigger that they're blown up to be. When you have this relatively homogenous group of
people at Yale, it's all to do with you can't speak to her like that. It's like, why? Like, she's
she's exactly the same as you, just that one grandmother's half African American or something.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And and everyone is from like the top, probably the top decile of income.
I mean, at Yale, there are more students from the top 1% of the income scale than from the
entire bottom 60%. Like, almost everybody is either I mean, and like, yeah, this is an interesting
point, the narcissism of small differences where a lot of the anger I felt was it was like between
like someone at the 90th percentile income, who they were angry at that 99th percentile, right?
Like, you know, whatever, like someone from a family of whatever doctors and lawyers who are
sort of upper middle class who are angry that the children of billionaires get to do something a
little more expensive or a little bit more, you know, they get to go on a more expensive vacation,
or, you know, like all of that was was very much confined with people who are extremely
affluent and well to do. And then there were, you know, a handful of people like me. I mean,
I, I'm the only one who had like the kind of life that I had, but I knew some people from more
kind of blue collar background. The underclass bona fides. Yeah, exactly. Who are really just
kind of like lower middle class blue collar, but not not like, I mean, it's the thing is like the
way that the system works is, I think we might have talked about this last time about just how
few people like only less than 3% of foster kids graduate from university, less than 3%.
And, you know, people who are from the bottom income quintile, it's 11%. And so, you know,
really, there are more, you know, you're four times more likely to graduate from college if
you're poor than if you live through the foster system. I mean, that's just how
the odds are so stacked against you. And so, yeah, I mean, even the people I knew who,
so I think I was one of like eight veterans on campus, you know, people think of the military
as like, oh, kind of like people who maybe didn't go to college or people who had maybe sort of a
more hard scrabble life, which is maybe to some extent true compared to people who go to expensive
colleges. But I was, so I was one of eight military vets on campus. But even when I would interact
with the other vets and listed vets in my cohort, so there were eight in my cohort, and I would speak
with them, I was like, oh, like, basically all of them were raised by two parents and like, you
know, had a mom and a dad who did prioritize education and who, you know, kind of said good
examples and, you know, all of those things. And I think, yeah, we focus a lot on, I think the
left focuses a lot on economics. I think certain strands of the right will focus on behavioral
genetics. But there is this sort of cultural component here, too, that people don't really
seem to want to touch. At some point, I will write this post up about sort of the limitations of
sort of overextending the findings of behavioral genetics. I think like, it's an important thing
to know and to understand and to sort of be fluent in, but also to not discount the role of
good habits, customs, sort of good behaviors. I wrote this post, nobody's a prisoner of their IQ.
And I think that's an important piece, too, that it's true that the guys I grew up with,
regardless of their parenting or whatever their economic conditions were, they probably weren't
going to be in a position to go to a very expensive, you know, selective university.
But I think if they had been maybe taught different values and inculcated different habits,
that, you know, two of them wouldn't have gone to prison. One of them was shot to death.
Friends working sort of menial, low income jobs. I mean, that's the sort of typical outcome of
people in that community. And I don't think like maybe we can't necessarily raise the ceiling for
some people. We can definitely raise the floor, I think.
Yeah. And so one of the last episodes I did in this room was with destiny. And he prompted this
idea that I named two step potential theory, which is a blending of individual agency with
real world limitations. Your efforts have tons of control over your outcome within the range that
your world's limitations will allow. Behavioral genetics teaches us that on average, around 50%
of everything that we are psychologically is inherited from our parents, boo, 50% of our
outcomes are limited by our genetics. Yes, but that also means that 50% of them are up to you,
which is great. This is another reason to not only compare yourself to who you were yesterday,
not to who someone else is today, but it's also a reason to try lots of things
until you find the intersection of something that you love and something that you're good at.
Yeah, it's like, you can imagine that you have a bracket within which your potential sits.
And that bracket is determined very heavily by outside forces. It's genetic predisposition,
it's life circumstances, it's nutrition, it's upbringing, it's the fucking unconscious trauma,
it's all the epigenetics, it's all of that stuff. But your position within that window
is almost exclusively on you. Now, that window also determines your ability to deploy your
efforts. But that just moves the window, that doesn't move you within the window.
James Clear has this nice line in Atomic Habits about how
certain people become so preoccupied with their genetic limitations that they never
try to actually reach them. I love that quote. Yeah, it's incredible. And I think people understand
this at least in the context of physical fitness. It's like, well, I'm never going to look like
Arnold Schwarzenegger, so I'm just not going to go to the gym, which is like a completely
misguided way to think about things. But yeah, I like this line about sort of behavioral genetics,
but then also there is individual agency involved. And you do have some control over this. I mean,
I just wrote this post about Machiavelli and how in the Discourses on Livy, he writes about how
he basically says, God doesn't want to do everything. He's like, some of it is up to you.
So he was in a much more religious time than we are living in Italy in Catholic Florence.
And God doesn't want to do everything. But then he says, you know, basically, 50% of your outcomes
are due to fortune, 50% of your outcomes are due to your own individual efforts, and fortune will
favor you if you take action, these kinds of things. There's a political philosopher, Harvey
Mansfield, who actually suggested that this transition indicates that Machiavelli may have
been an atheist, because at first he starts out saying, God doesn't want to do everything. And
then he starts saying, 50% is fortune and 50% is you. Well, where does that leave room for God?
And Machiavelli may have been sort of subtly indicating to the reader that, you know, you
can talk about God, you can think about God, but ultimately it's going to be luck and it's going
to be you and that's all you have. Or God has got his percentages wrong. Yeah, exactly. So one of
the things, I looked at your end of your review that you did, and that actually reminded me that
I hadn't done mine, is in the breakdown of what were the 10, I think you did the 10 most
read free articles and paid articles, which you'll still be up on your website and people
can go and check that out. And that prompted me while I was back home in the UK that,
fuck, I haven't done mine for modern wisdom. So thank you for that. But the best read article
that you had last year was one called How I Read. And there's this great screenshot from
Taleb in there. Taleb says, the opposite of reading is not not reading, but reading something
like the New Yorker. I love that line so much. What do you think he means by that?
You know, Taleb is so that you know, there's a screenshot from Twitter, I think there's,
you know, there is the sort of Twitter Taleb and then there's the the author. There's different,
you know, there's different versions of him. But I the way that I interpreted that, you know,
the contankerous tweet from Taleb was that, you know, if reading is defined as, you know, consuming
useful, important, timeless information, then, you know, reading, you know, the sort of hot takes in,
you know, legacy media institutions, you know, often, you know, colored by bias, colored by the
ideologies of our time that, you know, that's actually the opposite of getting useful, you
know, important, timeless information, you're getting sort of unuseful, unimportant, timely,
you know, relevant, maybe in the moment, and then tomorrow people will forget all about it.
And so I think that's kind of what he meant here. And you know, to be fair, like I wrote in there
that I do enjoy reading The New Yorker sometimes, but but not as much as I enjoy that tweet.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. What's your advice for people who want to become better readers?
I mean, it's, it's a habit, you know, I've been sort of sort of, you know, touching on this,
on this idea of discipline of habit of agency. And I think it's, it's similar to a gym routine,
right, where when you're starting out, it's, it's difficult, it's, you know, sort of building it
into your schedule. But then once you get going, it becomes much easier to just sort of set it
and forget it that, you know, from these hours, from this time of day, I'm, you know, I'm going
to the gym and here's the workout and here's the routine. And now you don't have to think about
it anymore, that sort of discipline equals freedom idea. And so I did that with reading.
I've really been kind of on and off reader since I was a kid. I taught myself how to read in the
foster homes. And then reading became this kind of, like the suiting experience for me that I could
sort of, you know, disconnect from the world and learn about information and, yeah, exactly.
And so I would do that. And so it's always been a sort of a companion for me. But, you know,
with, with, you know, everyone gets busy, everyone has a million things that they have to do,
they have work, they have obligations. But for reading, yeah, it really does, you really have
to treat it like a gym routine or like a job or something like an important habit, set time
aside every day. And so this is what I was doing in, in grad school was, you know, first thing in
the morning, I'd have my cup of coffee and I try to read whatever, you know, five pages,
10 pages, 15 pages, whatever it is. If people don't really have the reading habit at all,
I do like James Clear's idea of like, start from like the lowest unit of effort possible,
like sentence. Yeah, sentence. Yeah, I mean, it'd be really weird if you started from the word
level, but yeah, sentence level or a paragraph level, you know, ideally you could get a page in,
you know, something substantive, and then build your way from there, whether it's a chapter,
whether it's a book, and so on. And I think, yeah, breaking it down in that way is helpful,
because, you know, I speak to some people who want to read and they're like, okay,
I'm going to try to finish this book this week, or I'm going to try to finish this
book this month. And I think like, thinking in those terms isn't really helpful, I think you
have to break it down further of, instead of a book a month, I'm going to read three pages a day
or 10 pages a day. And then you'll finish the book when it gets finished. The other thing is,
if a book is uninteresting to you, or it's not holding your attention to just let it go,
you know, it's fine, you don't have to read it just because you bought it, or because you
rented it from the library or what have you. Because everybody else says that it's good,
or because you read on Twitter that it's really informative. You want to tell the people that
you've read it, that they've read it as well. Right. And yeah, you don't, I mean, that's one of the,
I was one of the things that I learned too, was, you know, a lot of people, a lot of the sort of
chattering class people, they will not read the books that they claim to have read, but they'll
read reviews. And so if you want to just like know about a book, to participate in a conversation,
just go read three or four reviews online. And that'll sort of give you the highlights of what
people are talking about, or what the takeaways are that people care about from the book. But if
you really want to do a deep dive, if you really want to understand a book, then yeah, you have to
read the whole thing cover to cover, but you know, take it slow, do what you're comfortable with.
If you want to skip around, that's fine too, that if a particular chapter title sticks out,
it seems to be especially provocative or interesting, start with that chapter first,
and then you can go back. I would recommend for most books, especially most older books,
to actually read the preface, the, you know, author's note, the foreword, because for a lot of
sort of older texts, you know, I mentioned Machiavelli earlier, it does help that those,
you know, the prologues and all those kinds of things, they will sort of contextualize the book
and sort of explain to some degree, why is this book important? Why do people care about it?
What's been the sort of commentary summary of this author's influence throughout the centuries?
And so I do recommend reading that and not just skipping to chapter one.
And yeah, I mean, there are other things too that you can read multiple books simultaneously,
there's no rule in place. I think we learned from school that one book at a time, you know,
read this and hear the formula for how you read. But actually, you can do whatever you want, skip
around, read two pages of this book, put it down, you know, take a week off, read this other book
for a while, I'll do that when I'm on vacation, I'll just start a new book. Even if I'm working on
three other books back home, I'll just pick up a new book off the shelf and go on vacation. And
that'll be my vacation book. I do weird things like that. And for me, it's helpful. And, and the
other thing is it's helpful to take notes to whether it's in the book itself, people get mad
at me sometimes on Twitter, they're like, Oh, you're defacing that book, like, Oh,
fucking bought it. Yeah, my book. Exactly. Yeah, it's not like I'm vandalized. You know,
there's a there's a really good book called how to read a book called Mortimer Adler by Mortimer
Adler. And he's, he was a professor at the University of Chicago in the mid mid late 20th
century. But he wrote this book basically, like, explaining the different forms of reading,
the different types of reading. And this is where I picked up a lot of this information
about it's okay to skip around what are your goals for reading, break down the habit. But
one of the points he's made is that no one missed, he makes this analogy says no one mistakes the
what are they called in in the composers of music, like the sheet, the sheet music or something,
no one confuses that for the melody itself, right? It's like no one's, you know, it's not the paper
is not sacred, the ideas on them are sacred. And most authors would be flattered if someone was
so invested in the book and the topic that added their own fucking, yeah, and the marginalia.
And like, yeah, I mean, it's you see this with like, if you visit museums, you know, Cambridge,
they have like Darwin's notes or his scribblings of other people's texts. And you can see like he
was reading and he was making notes. And, and he was doing this in a time where it was actually
harder to get books than it is now. And so engage with the book. Try to understand what the points
are in the book. Don't just I mean, this is something that I used to do, even though I was a
reader, I didn't really, I didn't really try to understand what the book was about before I started
it. It was like, Oh, here's an interesting title. And I'd read the back of it. And it would be,
Oh, it's about x, y, z. And I'll, okay, I'll just start reading it and sort of fumble my way through.
Rather than think about, okay, where's this author coming from? What point is he trying to make?
Why is this book important? Try to take that sort of metal level perspective as well,
so that you can really understand where he's coming from and break down the points.
If you really want to, especially for more modern social science books, one thing you can do is
essentially just read the first and last chapter or the preface in the last chapter. Because,
you know, that's just the way that's just a style of reading or style of writing now where,
you know, publishers want you to just basically summarize the idea at the beginning and the
end for busy people for tired people. What's this book about, you know, like, what are you going
to talk about? And then at the end say, here's what I talked about. And that'll sort of give you,
you know, maybe 50%. What a funny hack. That's so funny. What about revisiting
things? Because your recall seems to be quite impressive, which is something that people want.
They want to, reading something and then not being able to recall what you read is kind of,
in some ways, like not having read it at all. Yeah, well, I think taking notes, highlighting,
and then what I'll do is like, you know, I'll have like a Google doc or some kind of
note-taking app where I'll like cut and paste if it's like Kindle version or if it's the paper
version. I'll sometimes I'll just post it on Twitter. And then that'll be like the search
function where I can find it later. Or I can, yeah, I'll just let it get deleted from Twitter.
I know that would be not the access to the audience. It's my own archive of my notes.
Exactly. That would be that would be rough. Yeah. Yeah. And so yeah, so I think sharing it in that
way. And that's actually how my Twitter started was me just sharing notes and things I was reading.
That's like how the initial sort of growth occurred was, you know, I was in, I think it was an
undergrad when I started it in 2017, posting my notes online and my highlights and underlines and
and so yeah, I think like pinpointing the interesting points, doing like a very brief
summary, even it's literally one sentence, preferably a paragraph. If you finish a book,
like what did you get from this book? What are two or three things that you remember right now
having just finished read it? Because if you if you have just finished reading a book,
the most important or interesting or provocative points will be at the top of your mind.
Just try to paraphrase it. Don't even go back to the book and say, well, what did he actually say?
Try to say, what did I remember? Type it out, try to use that, that forced recall. And that'll help to
to to sort of get it into long term memory. And then every once in a while, like if I'm flying
on a plane, or if I'm, you know, in waiting in line or something, usually I'll read a book,
but sometimes I'll actually just revisit my notes and say, you know, what did that book say? Or what
was that point? And do like a control f if I just want to read about whatever mating psychology
or what have you, I'll just do the control f and okay, here are my notes on mating psychology
from David Buss or this book or that book. And that'll help me to just sort of connect the dots
and and and also help to provide material for my sub stack, which is most important, obviously.
Rob, I appreciate the hell out of you. It's very good to speak to you again. I'm so happy that
this book's finally out. It's taken forever. Yeah, it's been five years plus. Yeah, in the making.
Yeah, that this has been going and then it's been ready to be published for a good while as well.
And you've been sort of held at the starting line. So where should people go? They want to check out
the book that substack the everything else? Yeah, they can get my book troubled, a memoir,
foster care, family and social class, that's, you know, wherever, wherever books are sold.
And yeah, follow me on Twitter at Rob Gahenderson, substackrobgahenderson.com.
Hell yeah. Thanks, Rob. Thank you, Chris.
If you enjoyed that episode, then press here for a selection of the best clips
from the podcast over the last few weeks. And don't forget to subscribe.